ASTROPHOTOGRAPHY STACKING PIPELINE
A narrative introduction
====================================================================

INTRODUCTION

Point a camera at the night sky and take one photo, and you will
usually be disappointed. Faint objects like nebulae are so dim that a
single exposure mostly shows noise, not detail. The entire practice of
astrophotography image processing exists to solve one problem: how do
you pull a faint, real signal out of a noisy photo, using nothing but
math?

This document walks through that problem, the standard solution the
astrophotography field has settled on, and exactly how this project
implements that solution in code. It reads front to back like a short
textbook. Every term is explained in plain language the first time it
comes up, right there in the sentence, so you never need to stop and
look something up elsewhere.


--------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 1 — THE PROBLEM: NOISE IN THE DARK
--------------------------------------------------------------------

A camera sensor is a grid of millions of tiny light-collecting cells,
one per pixel. During an exposure, each cell counts roughly how many
particles of light (photons) landed on it, and that count becomes the
pixel's brightness value. If that were the whole story, a longer or more
sensitive exposure would always reveal fainter detail cleanly. It isn't
the whole story, because three sources of randomness get mixed into
every pixel's count along the way:

Shot noise is randomness in the light itself. Photons don't arrive at a
perfectly steady rate; they arrive at random moments, so even two pixels
receiving the exact same true amount of light will end up with slightly
different counts, purely by chance. This isn't a flaw in any particular
camera, it's a basic property of light.

Read noise is randomness added by the camera's own electronics every
time it measures a pixel and converts that measurement into a stored
number. It's there even in a zero-length exposure.

Dark current (also called thermal noise) is heat inside the sensor
knocking loose stray electrons even when no real light is hitting it at
all. It gets worse the longer the exposure and the warmer the sensor.

Put together, these three sources mean every pixel's brightness value is
really "the true signal, plus some amount of random error." The
relationship between the two is usually described with a single number:
signal-to-noise ratio, or SNR, which is exactly what it sounds like — the
strength of the real signal divided by the size of the random noise
around it. A high SNR means the real content clearly stands out; a low
SNR means it's buried in randomness, hard to tell apart from noise at
all. A single quick photo of a faint nebula typically has a low SNR.
Getting a usable image means finding a way to raise that number.


--------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 2 — THE SOLUTION: STACK MANY, TRUST THE AVERAGE
--------------------------------------------------------------------

The key insight the whole field relies on: if you take many separate
exposures of the same fixed target, the real signal shows up in the same
place in every exposure, but the noise is random and different each
time. That difference is exploitable.

Here's the reasoning in full. Average N exposures together. The real
signal in a given pixel is the same value in every exposure, so it just
adds up directly — N times as much signal as one exposure has, on
average. The noise, though, is random and independent from exposure to
exposure. Independent random quantities don't add up the same way when
averaged; a basic result from probability says they add "in quadrature,"
meaning the combined noise only grows by the square root of N, not by N
itself. Since SNR is signal divided by noise, and signal grew by N while
noise only grew by the square root of N, the ratio improves by N divided
by the square root of N, which simplifies to just the square root of N.

That's the single most important formula behind this entire project:
combining N independent exposures should improve SNR by roughly the
square root of N. Combine 4 photos, expect about 2 times cleaner.
Combine 25, expect about 5 times cleaner, in the ideal case. This
process of combining many exposures into one is called stacking, or
sometimes integration. Each individual input exposure is called a light
frame — "light" because it's a real, direct photo of the actual target,
as opposed to the calibration exposures described next.

Two problems stand between "many photos" and "a clean stacked result,"
and they have to be solved before the averaging above can actually work:

The first problem is that a camera and its optics have fixed, repeating
defects that stacking alone cannot fix — averaging the same defect into
every frame just leaves that defect sitting in the average, unchanged.
The fix is to deliberately photograph the defects themselves, using
special calibration exposures, and remove them mathematically before
combining the light frames. A dark frame is a shot taken with the lens
capped, at the exact same exposure length as the light frames, so no
real light gets in and whatever shows up is purely the sensor's own read
noise and dark current — that pattern can then be subtracted straight out
of every light frame. A bias frame is the shortest possible exposure the
camera can take, still capped, isolating just the electronic offset with
none of the dark-current buildup a longer dark would include; it's used
to clean up the next kind of frame, or as a rough stand-in when no
properly matched dark exists. A flat frame is a photo of something evenly
lit — twilight sky, or a dedicated light panel — through the same optics
as the real shots; since the true light hitting it really is uniform, any
variation that still shows up must be an optical flaw, most commonly
vignetting (natural dimming toward the corners of an image) or a dust
shadow (a small dim spot from a speck of dust near the sensor). Because a
flat's defect scales brightness down rather than adding to it, it gets
divided out rather than subtracted. To avoid injecting a fresh dose of
randomness from the calibration shots themselves, many dark frames (or
flats, or biases) are first combined into a single master frame using
the median (the middle value once a set of numbers is sorted) rather than
a plain average, since a median completely ignores a one-off fluke — like
a single stray high-energy particle striking the sensor, called a cosmic
ray hit — that an average would blend in.

The second problem is that a given star does not land on the exact same
pixel in every exposure. Tracking motors aren't perfectly accurate,
handheld shots move between frames, and some mount types introduce a
slow field rotation — an apparent rotation of the whole sky relative to
the frame — even while otherwise tracking correctly. Before frames can be
averaged pixel-by-pixel, they have to first be shifted (and sometimes
rotated) so the same star lands on the same pixel everywhere. This step
is called registration, or alignment.

Once frames are calibrated and aligned, they can finally be combined —
and even the combining step has more than one reasonable way to do it,
covered in the next chapter alongside the actual code.

There's one more step after combining, worth mentioning here because it
shapes a lot of design decisions later: a freshly stacked astronomical
image has an enormous range between its faintest and brightest real
content, and displaying that range directly on a screen produces a
nearly all-black image with a few bright dots — almost everything
interesting is crushed into indistinguishable dark pixels. A final
brightening step, called stretching, remaps intensity so the faint stuff
becomes visible without the bright stuff turning into a featureless white
blob.


--------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 3 — INSIDE THE PIPELINE: HOW THE CODE IMPLEMENTS THIS
--------------------------------------------------------------------

This project is organized so that each stage from Chapter 2 lives in its
own file, inside a Python package (a folder of code files that can be
imported as one unit) called astro_stack/. The overall flow, from a
folder of photos to a finished picture, is:

    load files -> calibrate (optional) -> align -> stack -> stretch and save

A command-line program, stack.py, is the thing you actually run. It
reads flags like --input, --output, and --stack from the terminal, and
calls one function, pipeline.run_pipeline(), which carries out every
stage above in order and returns a summary of what happened. Everything
in this chapter is really describing what happens inside that one
function call.

Loading and sorting (astro_stack/loader.py).
Every file in the input folder first has to become plain pixel data the
rest of the program can work with. This module knows how to decode three
families of file: FITS (the standard astronomy image format, storing
pixel data alongside observation metadata), camera RAW files (a camera's
minimally processed sensor data, before it's been turned into an
ordinary color photo — .cr2 for Canon, .nef for Nikon, .dng generically),
and ordinary formats like JPEG, PNG, and TIFF. A small data container
called Frame bundles one decoded image together with its file path,
exposure time, and which of the four frame types (light, dark, flat,
bias) it is. The function classify_filename() figures out that frame type
purely from the filename — an explicit word like "Dark" or a single
leading letter like "D_" is recognized, and anything unlabeled defaults
to a light frame, since an unlabeled photo is almost always meant to be a
real picture of the sky. load_frame() picks the correct decoder for one
file and classifies it; load_folder() does this for an entire directory
and returns four separate lists, one per frame type.

One detail worth calling out here: when this module decodes a camera RAW
file, it deliberately turns off two things a normal camera app would
apply automatically — gamma correction (a standard brightness curve
matched to human perception) and auto-brightness. Skipping both keeps
pixel values directly proportional to the light that was actually
captured, which is called linear data. That matters because the
calibration math in the next stage only works correctly on linear data;
a gamma-corrected image cannot be validly dark-subtracted or flat-
divided.

Calibration (astro_stack/calibration.py).
This module implements Chapter 2's calibration math directly:

    calibrated = (light − master_dark) / normalized_master_flat

build_master_dark(), build_master_bias(), and build_master_flat() each
median-combine a list of calibration frames of one type into a single
master frame, exactly as described above. calibrate_light() applies the
formula to one light frame, and calibrate_lights() is the entry point the
rest of the program calls: it checks whether any dark, flat, or bias
frames were found at all, and if none exist, it logs that calibration is
being skipped and passes the light frames through completely untouched.
This one check is what lets the exact same code handle a folder of phone
photos with no calibration set at all, and a full astrophotography
session with a proper calibration library, without needing separate code
paths for each case.

Alignment (astro_stack/alignment.py).
This module implements the registration step. Two different techniques
are used, and the code picks between them automatically for each frame.
The first, and the one tried first, is a library called astroalign,
which finds star-like points in an image, groups them into triangles
three at a time, and matches triangles between two images by their
shape — the ratio between a triangle's side lengths doesn't change even
if the whole image is rotated or shifted, so matching shapes reliably
identifies which star is which between frames. From enough matched
points, it solves directly for the exact rotation and shift needed to
line the images up, which correctly handles field rotation. Its
limitation is that it needs a reasonable number of clearly visible stars
to build triangles from in the first place — it has nothing to work with
on a nearly starless frame. For that case, the code falls back
automatically to phase correlation, a technique based on the Fast
Fourier Transform (a standard, efficient algorithm for analyzing a
signal in terms of its underlying frequency components). Phase
correlation computes how far one image has shifted relative to another
directly from their frequency-domain data, without needing to find any
individual stars at all — it works even with just one or two points, or
a single bright object like the Moon, as long as there's some sharp edge
to lock onto. Its own limitation is that it only recovers a straight-
line shift, not a rotation. align_frames() is the function that ties
this together: it picks one frame as a fixed reference, then aligns
every other frame to it, trying astroalign first and falling back to
phase correlation only when astroalign can't find enough stars.

Stacking (astro_stack/stacking.py).
This module implements the actual combining step, with three selectable
methods. A plain mean (the ordinary average) gets the full theoretical
square-root-of-N noise improvement from Chapter 2, but has no way to
notice a bad pixel — a passing satellite trail in even one frame still
gets blended into the result. A median (the middle value at each pixel,
across all frames) completely ignores a minority of bad frames at any
given pixel, at some cost in overall noise reduction efficiency compared
to the mean. The default method, sigma-clipped mean, tries to get the
best of both: at every pixel, it computes the average and the spread of
values across all frames (this "computing the spread and throwing out
what's too far from average, then repeating" process is called sigma
clipping), discards anything unusually far from the local average, and
only then takes the mean of what's left. This rejects the same kind of
outliers a median would, while keeping noise performance close to the
plain mean, because it only throws away the genuinely bad values instead
of collapsing everything toward a middle point. This module also
contains the functions that measure how well any of this actually
worked — covered fully in the next chapter, since that's where results
come from.

Post-processing (astro_stack/postprocess.py).
This module implements the stretching step from the end of Chapter 2.
The default method is an asinh stretch, named for the mathematical
function it uses (the inverse hyperbolic sine). That function behaves
almost like a straight line for small values and bends into a
logarithmic curve for large ones — which is exactly the shape needed
here: faint, near-background signal gets stretched close to
proportionally, so noise isn't exaggerated, while bright signal like
star cores gets compressed instead of clipping abruptly to solid white.
This same idea, under the name "Lupton stretch," is what produces the
well-known public color images from large sky surveys. save_image()
then writes the final result to disk, as a 16-bit file if maximum detail
was requested, or an ordinary 8-bit image otherwise.

Tying it together, and scaling up (astro_stack/pipeline.py and
astro_stack/streaming.py).
pipeline.py's run_pipeline() function calls every module above in the
right order. It also makes one decision before doing any real work: it
estimates how much memory the whole dataset would need if every file
were decoded and held at once, without actually decoding anything yet,
just by reading file headers and dimensions. If that estimate is small,
it runs the straightforward version described so far, which loads
everything into a computer's fast working memory (RAM) up front. If the
estimate is large — large enough that it might not fit in the machine's
available memory at all — it instead switches to the logic in
streaming.py, which processes one file at a time, and even one thin
horizontal slice of an image at a time, writing intermediate results to
temporary files on disk instead of keeping everything in memory
simultaneously. This second path does exactly the same calibration,
alignment, and stacking math as the first, just organized so it never
needs more than a small, fixed amount of memory, regardless of how many
files or how large they are.


--------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 4 — PROVING IT WORKS: TESTS AND METRICS
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Before any of the code above was trusted, each piece was checked against
synthetic data — data generated by the test code itself specifically so
the correct answer is already known. Stacking N identical copies of the
same fake image should return that exact image back unchanged, no matter
which of the three methods is used. Subtracting a fake dark frame with a
known fixed offset from a fake light frame with that same offset added
in should leave just the original signal behind, almost exactly.
Shifting a fake star field by a known, exact number of pixels and then
running it through alignment should recover and undo that precise shift.
Every one of these checks passed before the pipeline was ever pointed at
a real photo.

Passing synthetic tests isn't the same as working on real cameras,
though — real data has quirks synthetic data doesn't reproduce, which is
exactly what happened when this pipeline was run against an actual 80-
file DSLR (a standard interchangeable-lens camera) dataset. That real
test, and what it found, is the subject of the next chapter.

Measuring results, not just producing a picture, matters just as much as
the processing itself. The function that does this, measure_noise_snr(),
avoids needing a person to manually pick "an empty patch of sky" and "a
patch with the target" by relying on a simple fact: in almost any real
astronomical photo, background sky pixels vastly outnumber bright star or
target pixels. It converts an image to a single brightness channel, then
runs an iterative sigma-clipping pass (the same "throw out what's too far
from average, then repeat" idea from Chapter 3) over the ENTIRE image.
Because bright content is such a small minority of the total pixels,
this process converges on the sky background's typical brightness and
its natural spread automatically, with the stars and target effectively
excluded on their own. That measured spread becomes the number this
project calls "noise." The 99.9th percentile of brightness (a value
chosen so it can't be thrown off by one single stray bright pixel) stands
in for "how strong is the signal," and dividing that by the noise gives
the SNR defined all the way back in Chapter 1. Running this once on a
single raw frame and once on the final stacked result, and comparing the
two, is what produces every noise and SNR number this project reports —
alongside the theoretical square-root-of-N prediction from Chapter 2,
computed independently from the frame count alone, as the benchmark the
real measurement gets checked against.


--------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 5 — RESULTS: THE COCOON NEBULA
--------------------------------------------------------------------

The real-world test used a genuine 80-file Canon DSLR dataset of the
Cocoon Nebula (a glowing cloud of interstellar gas and dust, cataloged as
IC 5146): 25 light frames at 240 seconds each, plus 9 dark, 23 flat, and
23 bias calibration frames — all real camera captures, not synthetic
test data.

This immediately surfaced two real problems synthetic testing had
missed. First, the filename classifier from Chapter 3 was silently
misreading every single calibration frame as a light frame, because a
subtle quirk of how the original pattern-matching code worked meant it
never actually recognized "Bias" as a whole word inside a filename like
"Bias_000.fits." Once fixed, the same real dataset immediately exposed a
second, related gap: it used a different, single-leading-letter naming
convention the fix hadn't accounted for. Both are corrected now, with
tests built directly from the real filenames that broke them. Second,
loading all 80 full-resolution files into memory at once turned out to
need roughly 17 gigabytes, more than the 16-gigabyte machine running the
test had available — which is exactly the real-world problem the
streaming approach from Chapter 3 was built to solve.

With both fixed, the full dataset's 25 usable light frames ran start to
finish through sigma-clipped stacking, with this measured result:

    Background noise:    0.006517  ->  0.003248   (2.01x reduction)
    Theoretical target for 25 frames: square root of 25 = 5.00x
    Signal-to-noise ratio:  47.34   ->  92.00      (1.94x improvement)

The real improvement, about 2 times, fell noticeably short of the ideal
5 times predicted by the pure math in Chapter 2 — and there are real,
identifiable reasons why, rather than the measurement simply being
wrong. Aligning a frame with sub-pixel precision requires blending
neighboring pixels together slightly (a process called resampling or
interpolation), which correlates noise between adjacent pixels in a way
the ideal formula assumes doesn't happen. The real dark frames in this
dataset were shot across a range of sensor temperatures rather than one
single fixed temperature, and since dark current depends on temperature,
that correction wasn't a perfect match for every light frame. And the
last five of the twenty-five light frames matched noticeably fewer stars
during alignment than the rest, suggesting they may have come from a
slightly different imaging session. None of that is a flaw in the
measurement — if anything, a real result landing short of an idealized
theoretical prediction, for identifiable physical reasons, is exactly
what you'd expect from a pipeline measuring genuine pixel data instead of
just reporting a formula back.


CLOSING NOTE

What's deliberately not in this project yet: correcting the image's
overall color balance (the current result has a visible green tint, an
expected side effect of how camera color sensors are built, not
something addressed by the brightness-only stretching in Chapter 3), and
cropping away a faint seam near one edge of the stacked image where
frames didn't perfectly overlap after alignment. Both are understood,
explainable gaps rather than surprises, and both are documented as
planned next steps.
